Add page about Nitro database snapshots (#1593)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/03-nitro-database-snapshots.md

---
title: 'Nitro database snapshots'
description: This page explains how to supply a snapshot to Nitro and how to create a new snapshot
author: gligneul
sme: gligneul
target_audience: 'Node runners interested in starting Nitro with a database snapshot'
content_type: how-to
sidebar_position: 11
---

> Nitro stores the chain state and data in a database in the local filesystem. When starting Nitro for the first time, it will initialize an empty database by default and start processing transactions from genesis. It takes a long time for the node to sync from genesis, so starting from a database snapshot is advisable instead. Moreover, for the Arb1 chain, you must start from a snapshot because Nitro cannot process transactions from the Classic Arbitrum node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nitro stores the chain state and data in a database in the local filesystem. When starting Nitro for the first time, it will initialize an empty database by default and start processing transactions from Genesis. It takes a long time for the node to sync from Genesis, so starting from a database snapshot is advisable instead. Moreover, for the Arb1 chain, you must start from a snapshot because Nitro cannot process transactions from the Classic Arbitrum node.
```

## Supply the snapshot URL to Nitro

> There are multiple ways to supply Nitro with the database snapshot. The most straightforward way is to provide the configuration so Nitro downloads the snapshot by itself. It is also possible to download the database manually and supply it to Nitro. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple ways to supply Nitro with the database snapshot. The most straightforward way is to provide the configuration, so Nitro downloads the snapshot by itself. It is also possible to download the database manually and supply it to Nitro. 
```

---

## Downloading the snapshot from a URL

Instead of letting Nitro search for the latest snapshot, you can provide a specific URL to download by setting the flag `--init.url` with the snapshot URL. If the URL points to a remote server, it should start with the `https://` protocol definition. Given the URL, Nitro will download the snapshot as described in the “Downloading the Latest Snapshot” section.

Nitro also supports importing files from the local file system. In this case, you should provide the file path to `--init.url` starting with the prefix `file://` followed by the file path. Beware that when running Nitro inside a Docker container, you must mount a volume containing the provided snapshot using the docker flag `-v` (see [Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/container/run/#volume)). Otherwise, the Nitro container running inside Docker won’t be able to find the snapshot in your local filesystem.

---

## Downloading the snapshot manually

> It is possible to download the snapshot manually and supply the archive instead of having Nitro download it.
> 
> The first step is downloading the snapshot. The command below illustrates how to do that on the command line using wget. The `-c` flag tells the wget to continue the download from where it left off, which is helpful because snapshots can be huge files, and the download can fail mid-way. The `-P` flag tells wget to place the snapshot on the temporary dir.
> 
> ```shell
> wget -c -P /tmp "$SNAPSHOT_URL"
> ```
> 
> After downloading the snapshot, make sure to verify whether the checksum matches the one provided by the remote server. To fetch the checksum, you may run the command below. 
> 
> ```shell
> wget -q -O - "$SNAPSHOT_URL".sha256
> ```
> 
> Once you know the expected snapshot checksum, run the command below to compute the checksum of the downloaded snapshot. Then, compare both add see if they are the same. If they are not the same, consider redownloading the snapshot. You must provide a valid snapshot to Nitro; otherwise, it won’t work properly.
> 
> ```shell
> sha256sum $PATH_TO_SNAPSHOT
> ```
> 
> Finally, you can provide path to the downloaded snapshot archive to Nitro using the `--init.url` flag, as described in the “Download the Snapshot from a URL” section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to download the snapshot manually and supply the archive instead of having Nitro download it.

The first step is downloading the snapshot. The command below illustrates how to do that on the command line using wget. The `-c` flag tells the wget to continue the download from where it left off, which is helpful because snapshots can be huge files, and the download can fail mid-way. The `-P` flag tells wget to place the snapshot on the temporary dir.

```shell
wget -c -P /tmp "$SNAPSHOT_URL"
```

After downloading the snapshot, make sure to verify whether the checksum matches the one provided by the remote server. To fetch the checksum, you may run the command below. 

```shell
wget -q -O - "$SNAPSHOT_URL".sha256
```

Once you know the expected snapshot checksum, run the command below to compute the checksum of the downloaded snapshot. Then, compare both and see if they are the same. If they are not the same, consider redownloading the snapshot. You must provide a valid snapshot to Nitro; otherwise, it won’t work properly.

```shell
sha256sum $PATH_TO_SNAPSHOT
```

Finally, you can provide a path to the downloaded snapshot archive to Nitro using the `--init.url` flag, as described in the “Download the Snapshot from a URL” section.
```

### Downloading snapshot parts

> If the snapshot is divided in parts, you should first download the manifest file in `<snapshot-url>.manifest.txt`. This manifest contains the names and checksums of each part. For instance, the snippet below shows how the manifest file should look like. You may use the commands described previously to download each part of the snapshot and verify their checksums.
> 
> ```shell
> a938e029605b81e03cd4b9a916c52d96d74c985ac264e2f298b90495c619af74  archive.tar.part0
> 9e095ce82e70fa62bb6e7b4421e7f2c04b2cd9e21d2bc62cbbaaeb877408357b  archive.tar.part1
> e92172d6eaf770a76c7477e6768f742fc51555a5050de606bd0f837e59c7a61d  archive.tar.part2
> d1b6fb9aeeb23903cdbb2a7cca8e6909bff4ee8e51c8a5acac2a142b3e3a5437  archive.tar.part3
> f37e4552453202f2044e58b307bab7e466205bd280426abbc84f8646c6430cfa  archive.tar.part4
> 972c5f513faca6ac4fadd22c70bea97707c6d38e9a646432bc311f0ca10497ed  archive.tar.part5
> ```
> 
> After downloading all the parts and verifying their checksums, you may use the command below to join them into a single archive.
> 
> ```shell
> cat archive.tar.part* > archive.tar
> ```
> 
> ---
> 
> ## Extracting the snapshot manually
> 
> It is also possible to extract the snapshot archive and place the files manually. First, you need to download the snapshot archive as described in “Manually Downloading the Snapshot”. Then, create the directory where Nitro will look for its database. By default, Nitro stores the database on `$HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro`. Move the archive to this directory and extract it. The commands below exemplify this process for the Arbitrum Sepolia chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the snapshot is divided into parts, you should first download the manifest file in `<snapshot-url>.manifest.txt`. This manifest contains the names and checksums of each part. For instance, the snippet below shows how the manifest file should look. You may use the commands described previously to download each part of the snapshot and verify their checksums.

```shell
a938e029605b81e03cd4b9a916c52d96d74c985ac264e2f298b90495c619af74  archive.tar.part0
9e095ce82e70fa62bb6e7b4421e7f2c04b2cd9e21d2bc62cbbaaeb877408357b  archive.tar.part1
e92172d6eaf770a76c7477e6768f742fc51555a5050de606bd0f837e59c7a61d  archive.tar.part2
d1b6fb9aeeb23903cdbb2a7cca8e6909bff4ee8e51c8a5acac2a142b3e3a5437  archive.tar.part3
f37e4552453202f2044e58b307bab7e466205bd280426abbc84f8646c6430cfa  archive.tar.part4
972c5f513faca6ac4fadd22c70bea97707c6d38e9a646432bc311f0ca10497ed  archive.tar.part5
```

After downloading all the parts and verifying their checksums, you may use the command below to join them into a single archive.

```shell
cat archive.tar.part* > archive.tar
```

---

## Extracting the snapshot manually

It is also possible to extract the snapshot archive and place the files manually. First, you need to download the snapshot archive as described in “Manually Downloading the Snapshot”. Then, create the directory where Nitro will look for its database. By default, Nitro stores the database on `$HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro`. Move the archive to this directory and extract it. The commands below exemplify this process for the Arbitrum Sepolia chain.
```

```shell
export CHAIN=sepolia-rollup
export ARCHIVE_PATH=/tmp/archive.tar.gz
mkdir -p $HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro
cd $HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro
tar zxfv $ARCHIVE_PATH
```

You should see the following subdirectories in this directory after extracting the archive.

```shell
arbitrumdata
l2chaindata
nodes
```

---

## Creating a snapshot

> To generate the a snapshot for the Nitro database, first you need to stop the process gracefully. You must not generate the snapshot while Nitro is running because the database might be in a intermediary state. Nitro should print logs like the ones described below when stopping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate a snapshot for the Nitro database, you first need to stop the process gracefully. You must not generate the snapshot while Nitro runs because the database might be in an intermediary state. Nitro should print logs like the ones described below when stopping.
```

INFO [08-22|18:10:55.298] Persisted trie from memory database      nodes=34  size=11.19KiB  time="283.875µs" gcnodes=0   gcsize=0.00B     gctime=0s          livenodes=2414 livesize=794.81KiB
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.298] Writing cached state to disk             block=39861 hash=2a9dd3..f00ff0 root=139d5a..d6bf21
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.298] Persisted trie from memory database      nodes=73  size=24.88KiB  time="502.916µs" gcnodes=0   gcsize=0.00B     gctime=0s          livenodes=2341 livesize=769.93KiB
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.299] Writing cached state to disk             block=39861 hash=2a9dd3..f00ff0 root=139d5a..d6bf21
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.299] Persisted trie from memory database      nodes=0   size=0.00B     time="1.417µs"   gcnodes=0   gcsize=0.00B     gctime=0s          livenodes=2341 livesize=769.93KiB
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.299] Writing snapshot state to disk           root=bd18ce..3b0763
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.299] Persisted trie from memory database      nodes=0   size=0.00B     time="1.125µs"   gcnodes=0   gcsize=0.00B     gctime=0s          livenodes=2341 livesize=769.93KiB
INFO [08-22|18:10:55.304] Blockchain stopped
```

> After nitro stopped, go to the database directory and generate an archive file the directories `arbitrumdata`, `l2chaindata`, and `nodes`. By default, the database directory for nitro is `$HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro`. The commands below exemplify how to generate the snapshot for Nitro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After nitro stops, go to the database directory and generate an archive file for the directories `arbitrumdata`, `l2chaindata`, and `nodes`. By default, the database directory for nitro is `$HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro`. The commands below exemplify how to generate the snapshot for Nitro.
```

```shell
export CHAIN=sepolia-rollup
export ARCHIVE_PATH=/tmp/archive.tar.gz
cd $HOME/.arbitrum/$CHAIN/nitro
tar zcfv $ARCHIVE_PATH arbitrumdata l2chaindata nodes
```

> This command purposely omits the `wasm` directory from the snapshot archive. The `wasm` contains native-code executable, so it might be a security concern for users downloading the snapshot. If the user downloading the snapshot trusts you, or if you are storing the snapshot for your own use, you may include the `wasm` directory in it.
> 
> ### Optional: divide it into parts
> 
> It is possible to divide the snapshot into smaller parts to facilitate its download. This is particularly useful for archive snapshots of heavily used chains, such as arb1. These kind of snapshots can reach terabytes, so is useful to divide them into smaller parts. The snippet below illustrates how to divide the snapshot into parts using the split command. The `-b` argument tells split to divide the snapshot into 100 GB parts. The `-d` argument tells split to enumerate the parts using a numeric suffix instead of a alphabetic one.
> 
> ```shell
> split -b 100g -d archive.tar.gz archive.tar.gz.part
> ```
> 
> After dividing it into parts, you should generate the manifest file that contains the names and checksums of the parts. This files will be used by Nitro to know how many parts there are and to validate their checksum. The command below exemplifies how to do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command purposely omits the `wasm` directory from the snapshot archive. The `wasm` contains native-code executables, so it might be a security concern for users downloading the snapshot. If the user downloading the snapshot trusts you, or if you are storing it for your own use, you may include the `wasm` directory in it.

### Optional: divide it into parts

It is possible to divide the snapshot into smaller parts to facilitate its download. This is particularly useful for archive snapshots of heavily used chains, such as arb1. These kinds of snapshots can reach terabytes, so dividing them into smaller parts is helpful. The snippet below illustrates how to divide the snapshot into parts using the split command. The `-b` argument tells the split to divide the snapshot into 100 GB parts. The `-d` argument tells split to enumerate the parts using a numeric suffix instead of an alphabetic one.

```shell
split -b 100g -d archive.tar.gz archive.tar.gz.part
```

After dividing it into parts, you should generate the manifest file containing the parts' names and checksums. Nitro will use these files to know how many parts there are and to validate their checksum. The command below exemplifies how to do that.
```
